---
layout: page
title: "2.4.2 UFAs"
published: false
permalink: /2.4.2-ufas/
---

[← 2.3 LLMs](/2.3-llms/)

<br>

### SUMMARY OF UFAs


- **The LLM TF UFA is the only practical interface between human language and computers**. An LLM transformer (TF) is a Universal Function Approximator (UFA). This word suggests that an LLM (TF + internal agent) is not intelligent. Therefore Agentic AI (deterministic Python agent + LLM) must be designed carefully to work reliably and safely. 
- **A TF UFA is 100% deterministic**. There is a very mistaken idea that GPUs are not deterministic like CPUs. They are. For basic info, watch this: 
  - ByteMonk released (26.0510 ) a fantastic video that clearly describes **how GPUs operate ([Google's New TPU Quietly Ends the GPU Era?](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=iseM_Sb-ruo))**. 
  - In the future, I will start using "GPU-based" and "CPU-based" to distinguish betweed the AI and the agentic parts of apps ("deterministic" is a misleading misnomer). 
- **A TF UFA performs token sequence recognition**. 
- You have to use an approximator to recognize token sequences because **human languages are just primitive hints designed for intelligent humans to communicate complex concepts**. 
- **Word combinations can be almost infinite**, with all kind of spelling mistakes, abbreviations, bad grammar, etc etc. You can never create a DB of all possible combinations.
- **UFA can make a good guess of the meaning of inputs that are not an exact match to to any inputs it was programmed ("trained") on.**
- **The only binary-based computers can process human language (HL) is to implement a UFA for massive brute force computational analysis** (thus GPUs instead of CPUs; theoretically you could use a CPU for any GPU task, but it would be vastly slower).
- The UFA works by converting input tokens (word parts, "Human Language (HL)") into numbers (what I call "vector language" (VL)). **The UFA has no concept of anything but numbers**. 
- The UFA then performs massive GPU computations to create from the original VL a very detailed numberical representation of the meaning of the entire token input set (lets just call this the "storyline"). In most LLM TFs, that storyline is stored in the last token VL.
- The storyline is a very detailed conceptual/feature summation/detection of the meaning of the input. **The concepts/features are derived not from human interpretations of language, but from the training data set. And they are strictly numerical (machine language).**
- THe storyline is converted into a probability for each token in the entire vocabulary. The best token is chosen as the next token (unless you use temperature, which selects less than optimal token to give the illusion that the UFA is not deterministic).

<br>

### **TOC of subtopics**

**[1 The requirement for a human-language <> computer interface](/2.0.1_ufa_reqs/)**

- Human communication systems (language) are designed for human-style intelligence.
- Digital systems do not have human-style intelligence. 
- Digital systems are vital for humans. We need a bridge. 
- TF UFA is only viable option. But it has limitations.

**[2 Latent semantic computation](/2.0.2-ufa-latent-semantic-compute/)** (chat) 

“Latent semantic computation” basically means:
- the TF is computing on hidden meaning representations,
- not directly on human words.

**[3 ZiptieAI 2D demo UFA](/2.0.3-ufa-demo-zai-2d/)** 

A very simple FFN UFA conceptual demo (meant to convey the basics of how an FFN can detect complex features).

**[4 Welch 2D demo UFA](/2.0.4-ufa-demo-welch/)** (Belgium/Netherlands)

A simple conceptual demo that has received almost 400K views and great reviews.
- Basic function 
  - Input x/y (lat/long) coordinates and 
  - Output if location is in Belgium or Netherlands. 
- This UFA can be programmed manually. 
- There are several core misconceptions in this video. They are very instructive.
  - Its is supposed to demo LLM model concepts
  - But in an LLM, you dont process raw input data in the NN; you process vector Langage.
  - VLang has smooth (except for non-activation areas) outputs. This demo has binary outputs (your are in one country or the other).


**[5 Training](/2.0.5-ufa-training/)**

My take on training:
- Training defines EXACTLY what outputs for any input. Its deterministic outcome. This all runs on a GPU, which is a deterministic computation device.
- The pre-outputs are scalars values that at the determninistic probability that each possible output is the one you want.
- Best value is chosen (unless temperature used… and this is also deterministic)
- During training
  - for each input / output pair
  - adjust Weighs and biases to slightly improve the coomputation of this pair as the best value (because this is a good match)

**[6 CNN UFA](/2.2.1-ufa-cnn-dense-layers/) (TODO)** (convoluted neural networks). 

AlexNet 2012 is an excellent demo.
- 2012 AlexNet Object recognition demo
- Data for training was the key (you cant train this manually)
- This is an excellent demo to understand the basics before tackling TF UFA

**[7 TF UFA](/2.4.2.7-ufa-tf/)** (transformer) 

A TF is the best UFA for human language. This section talks about the **GPT-3 TF**. Newer models may be much more powerful, but the core techniques they use to implement a UFA will be similar. 

- A TF performs **computational pattern matching**.
- TF takes the **convolution/max-pooling** concept in CNNs and duplicates the same idea for language in TF as **Attention-heads/softmax**. 
- TF converts each (1) Human Language (HLang) input (prompt) into (2) Vector Language (VLang).
- The VLang for each prompt is refined into a "storyline".
- The **(3) storyline of the last token is used to determine the vocab token that most closely matches what has been programmed into the NN for the current input**.
- **(4) TF adds the new token to the input and repeats the process** (until finished or told to stop).
- Human-language/JSON can be added to the initial HLang input to describe how the **(5) LLM should customize the response content and structure**. 

<!-- **[8 Predictive/robotic](/2.1-predictive-nns/)**

These are simple NN UFAs used for special purposes. They can be trained on a local PC.  -->

<br>

--------

<br>


THIS IS ORPHAN PAGE??? For examples of TF Agentic with AI see "4 Agent+AI concepts" on page [(4) Agentic AI](/agentic-ai/)


<!-- WELCH DEMO - Its spending too much effort with 3d depictions. These depictions are nice to look at, and impressive, but they dont convey an understanding of what is going on.
 - Video tries to expand this to multi-layer NNs. But this is where the main idea of this demo breaks down. I will explain why in [4b Belgium UFA multilayer UFA](/2b-4b-belgium-multilayer-UFA/) (see below). 
 ----
 **[3 Digits UFA](/2b-3-digits-UFA/) (TODO)** tries to use the Belgium demo to detect digits.
- You often see CNNs used to detect digits. 
- In this demo, I want to show how you could try to do this with 
  -  a manually programmed UFA 
  - built ono the Belgium demo. 
- It wont work well, but is still instructive. -->

26.0519 (v1 26.0510)
